---
layout: post
date: 2023-08-23
title: "ABCs"
categories: [ shitpost, programming ]
tags: 
description: "Python ABCs"
featured: false
hidden: false
image: assets/images/ABCs.jpg
---

In my last post I gave an example of a class you'd only inherit and not directly instantiate and so it seemed worthwhile to write a bit about abtract base classes too.

The typical form you encounter is when someone wants to ensure certain methods are implemented. They'll inherit from ABC (or specify `metaclass=abc.ABCMeta`, which results in the same thing) then specify an `abstractmethod` which needs to be implemented. For example we have a class `A` below which is meant to be inherited. 

```python
import abc 

class A(metaclass=abc.ABCMeta):
    @abc.abstractmethod
    def foo(self):
        pass

a = A()
```

-> If we try to instantiate A itself we get `TypeError: Can't instantiate abstract class A with abstract method foo`. The following will result in a similar error

```python
class B(A):
    pass

b = B()
```

However, once you've specified the methods you're good to go and the following will work.

```python
class B(A):
    def foo(self):
        return True

b = B()
```

Though if you want to corrupt `A` you can of course.. and so the following will work too :)

```python
class B(A):
    pass

B.__abstractmethods__ = frozenset()
b = B()
```

But that isn't really the point of my example or I think the main great thing about abstract base classes.

One of the main reasons they're interesting is because an implementation of a class can be considered to be a _subclass_ or an instance of an abstract class.. even when you haven't inherited / specified or done anything at all to it! The actual PEP back in 2007 for this - [PEP-3119](https://peps.python.org/pep-3119/), goes into some details. 

A great result of this PEP was the ability to recognise an object (such as a class) conforms to a particular protocol. i.e. That the class has certain kinds of behavior and that it can do certain methods. The [collections module](https://docs.python.org/3.10/library/collections.abc.html) is probably the best example of these ([source code here](https://github.com/python/cpython/blob/3.10/Lib/_collections_abc.py)). 

ABCs implement the dunders expected but most importantly the `__subclasshook__` which checks the class method resolution order and dict for the expected methods. Realistically what this means is that I can create a list and validate it's an Iterable. 

```python
from collections.abc import Iterable

a_list = [1,2,3]

print(isinstance(a_list, Iterable)) # True
print(issubclass(a_list, Iterable)) # Errors because it's not a class 
```

It also means I can make my custom class - Say, an Iterator which requires the `__iter__` and `__next__` methods implemented, then actually validate it in my tests using a simple `isinstance` or `issubclass`. In some ways this makes testing easier and understanding what I expect from my class a whole lot more comprehensible.

```python
from collections.abc import Iterable, Iterator

class A:
    def __init__(self) -> None:
        self.a = 1

    def __iter__(self):
        return self
    
    def __next__(self):
        self.a = self.a + self.a
        return self.a

print(isinstance(A, Iterable))      # False
print(isinstance(A(), Iterable))    # True
print(issubclass(A, Iterable))      # True

print(isinstance(A, Iterator))      # False
print(isinstance(A(), Iterator))    # True
print(issubclass(A, Iterator))      # True

a = A()
print(next(a))                      # 2
print(next(a))                      # 4
print(next(a))                      # 8
print(next(a))                      # 16
```